Create focus-returns-trigger-9au0ou.md (#2022)
auto-wcag/auto-wcag: _rules/focus-returns-trigger-9au0ou.md

---
id: 9au0ou
name: Focus returns to trigger
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that when a modal closes the focus returns to the trigger that opened the modal.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:2.4.3: # Focus Order (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
  wcag-technique:G59: # Placing the interactive elements in an order that follows sequences and relationships within the content
    forConformance: false
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - Accessibility Tree
  - DOM Tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    -  Helen Burge
  previous_authors:
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [modal][] that when closed the [focus][] returns to the [trigger][].

## Expectation

> On closing the [modal][], the assistive technology [focus][] will return to the item in the owning document that triggered the [modal][].

Reviewer: I see two difficulties here:
- we need to tie the "open" button/link/… with the modal, which we can't really do if we target the modal (there is little way to know how it was opened);
- this sounds like a process rather than a static check, that's OK but that is also something we do not have in rules so far (they check a static snapshot of the page).

---
My suggestion would be to have an Applicability on the trigger, which with our definition could be "an [instrument](https://act-rules.github.io/glossary/#instrument-to-achieve-an-objective) to open a modal", and an Expectation in the line of "after opening + closing, the focus is back on the trigger that was used for opening".
(that would also catch cases where several buttons can open the same modal but focus always go back to the same, rather than the one that was used)

We still need to be careful about how we phrase the process, since it is something we do not have currently in our rules…

I think we can also define "modal" as "role of `dialog` + `aria-modal="true"`" to get a less ambiguous definition 🤔 And "open" would be something about making it visible.

Author: All good points, and yes - I need to work on it more 👍 

I like your suggestions. I will work on this in the next few days.

## Assumptions

There are no assumptions.

## Accessibility Support

There are no accessibility support issues known.

## Background

### Bibliography

- [Understanding Success Criterion 2.4.3: Focus Order](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/focus-order.html)
- [G59: Placing the interactive elements in an order that follows sequences and relationships within the content](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G59)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

The button that is activated to open the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to it when the [modal][] is dismissed using the close button in the modal.

> ```html

Reviewer 2: I've made some progress on some code for these examples.  I think I can't fit it into this file.  There's too much code.  So I'll put it into separate files.  Other ACT rules do this, so it will work in the long term.  I think that I'll need to do some github trickery and push to your topic branch, Helen.  Wish me luck.

---
id: 9au0ou
name: Focus returns to trigger
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that when a modal closes the focus returns to the trigger that opened the modal.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:2.4.3: # Focus Order (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
  wcag-technique:G59: # Placing the interactive elements in an order that follows sequences and relationships within the content
    forConformance: false
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - Accessibility Tree
  - DOM Tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    -  Helen Burge
  previous_authors:
---

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any [modal][] or item with the role of `dialog` + `aria-modal="true"` that when no longer visible, the [focus][] returns to the [instrument][] or [trigger][] that made the [modal][] visible.

Reviewer: Some issues I see with this:
* This seems to mix the Applicability and intention of the rule. Especially, the "when no longer visible, the focus returns to…" part is what the rule actually checks, not what it applies to.
* I'm not sure we can really use "modal" from the ARIA authoring practices as a definition here. OTOH, we should be good by looking at `dialog` elements + `role="modal"` ones.
* By targeting an already opened modal, we do not really know what was the instrument used to open it. I.e. if there are two buttons to open the modal, but the test starts when the modal is already opened, how can we check that we return to the correct one. I think the Applicability should either target the instrument to open a modal, or the combination of the open modal plus the instrument that opened it. Targeting the instrument seems easier (i.e. it means that opening the modal is part of the test).
* I'm not sure anymore where we are with the full "test instructions" bit (i.e. this rule requires some precise manipulations). I think this is part of the "stateful rules" discussion. Let's just assume the problem will be solved elsewhere and not care about it here 😄 We may have to adapt the rule according to the decision reached, however.
* We can probably use the "open/close" modal vocabulary only (i.e.  not mention visibility, or enter/exit). This is linked to either `aria-modal` or the `showModal` status in HTML sepcs, so we have both the technical solid ground fnor it, and easy enough vocabulary to understand.

## Expectation

> On exiting the [modal][] making it no longer visible, the assistive technology [focus][] will return to the item in the owning document that was used to make the [modal][] visible.

Reviewer: I think we do not need to refer to AT, maybe somethnig like:
```suggestion
After the [modal][] is closed, the [instrument][] that was used to open it becomes [focused][].
```

		<button type="button" onclick="openDialog('dialog1', this)">Open modal dialog</button>
		<button type="button">Do nothing</button>
		<div id="dialog_layer" class="dialogs">
			<div role="dialog" id="dialog1" aria-labelledby="dialog1_label" aria-modal="true"
					 class="hidden">
				<h2 id="dialog1_label" class="dialog_label">Dialog title</h2>
				<div class="dialog_form">Dialog content.</div>
				<button type="button" class="close-button topright" aria-label="Close" title="Close" 
						onclick="closeDialog(this)">
					&times;
				</button>
				<div style="text-align: right;">
					<button type="button" onclick="closeDialog(this)">Ok</button>
					<button type="button" onclick="closeDialog(this)">Cancel</button>
				</div>
			</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>
```

#### Passed Example 2

The button that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to it when the [modal][] is dismissed using the escape key.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Passed Example 3

The button that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to it when the [modal][] is dismissed using the cancel button.

```html
Code needed!

> ```

Reviewer: I think that closing the modal with a "close" or "cancel" button is essentially the same thing and doesn't require separate examples.

> 

Reviewer: Should we have an example where the modal is closed by a link rather than a button (also a not good practice example, but we want to illustrate that any way to close it is taken in consideration).

#### Passed Example 4

The link that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to it when the [modal][] is dismissed using the close button in the modal.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Passed Example 5

The link that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to it when the [modal][] is dismissed using the escape key.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Passed Example 6

The link that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to it when the [modal][] is dismissed using the cancel button.

```html
Code needed!

> ```

Reviewer: Same remark about close/cancel buttons.

#### Passed Example 7

> The page has a list of buttons that is activated to display a [modal][], the [focus][] is returned to the correct button on dismissing the modal.

Reviewer: This could also be a mix of buttons and links to open the modal.

```html
Code needed!
```

> 

Reviewer: I think we should also have an example where the modal has several ways to be closed (buttons, link, keyboard) and all work.

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1
The button that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to the item after it when the [modal][] is dismissed.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Failed Example 2
The button that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to the start of the page when the modal is dismissed.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Failed Example 3
The link that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to the item after it when the [modal][] is dismissed.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Failed Example 4
The link that is activated to display the [modal][] gets the [focus][] returned to the start of the page when the modal is dismissed.

```html
Code needed!
```

#### Failed Example 5
The page has a list of buttons that is activated to display a [modal][], the [focus][] is returned to the incorrect button on dismissing the modal.

```html
Code needed!
```

> 

Reviewer: I think we need here an example with several ways to close the modal, and one of them returns the focus but not the other (this illustrate that **all** ways to close the modal are tested).

---
id: 9au0ou
name: Focus returns to trigger
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that when a modal closes the focus returns to the trigger that opened the modal.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:2.4.3: # Focus Order (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
  wcag-technique:G59: # Placing the interactive elements in an order that follows sequences and relationships within the content
    forConformance: false
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - Accessibility Tree
  - DOM Tree
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    -  Dan Tripp
    -  Helen Burge
---

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any element with a semantic role of dialog or alertdialog that is not visible.

Reviewer 3: is "modal" needed?

```suggestion
This rule applies to any element with a semantic role of modal dialog or alertdialog that is not visible.
```

## Expectation

> The element that has the focus when the target element becomes visible is the same element that receives focus when the target element stops being visible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The element that triggers the target element to become visible is the same element that receives focus when the target element stops being visible.
```
